# The Quest

What forces should shape a computer program? What are the
qualities that make someone a good programmer? Is there a
way of relating to computers that is timeless and humane?
How do we make computer programs that have the character of
nature? These are the questions Verse seeks to answer.

The answers to these questions are not objective facts about
the world, waiting to be discovered by scientific inquiry.
Nor are they matters of opinion that can be reshaped at a
whim. Rather, the answers to these questions will present
themselves as deeply human truths. Often in the search for
answers, we will come to a fork in the road: we can choose
this answer or that answer. The sum of all our choices
creates a *culture of computing*.

# Cultures of Computing

Many such cultures exist. If you imagine a few different
types of people who make computer programs, you will have a
sense of this.

For example, take the old "hacker" stereotype: a lone
programmer, probably male, who goes by a pseudonym on the
internet and works on projects from home. Rather than seek
money or power, he chases the strange thrill of anonymous
notoriety.

Or imagine a team of Senior Enterprise Architects arranged
around a whiteboard, gesticulating at drawings of boxes and
lines. They are Serious Business People who know the proper
way of doing things, and their social hierarchy is based on
who knows the most about the ins and outs of the complex
systems they build.

Or perhaps a huddle of startup engineers round a table in a
house or a tiny office, feverishly banging out code to get a
product launched before their money runs out. In that
culture, speed is the greatest value. The person who can
make something work the fastest is the one whose code will
make it into the app.

Each of these cultures is consistent within itself. Each is
well-suited to its environment and the forces constraining
it. I can't say any of these cultures is better than
another, or that any is bad, but I will say that I don't
really want to live in any of them.

The culture embodied in Verse is different from the cultures
I've described above, but it is the same type of thing. It
too is consistent within itself and with the forces acting
on it. And it answers the same questions as the other
cultures, though its answers are very different.

# Culture-bearing Artifacts

Every culture shapes and is shaped by the artifacts used by
its people.

The coffee maker, the lawnmower, the selfie stick, the
_mate_ gourd, the freeway interchange—these things exist in
a sort of symbiosis with the culture around them. They do
not make sense outside the culture, and the culture cannot
exist without them. Where they go, the culture follows.
Where the culture goes, these things appear.

Culture-bearing artifacts need not be physical. Language is
an artifact too. Patterns of social structure like democracy
and corporations are artifacts. Creative works like art,
music, stories, and even software are artifacts as well.

When we include such things in the category of artifacts, it
becomes clear that artifacts are the primary means by which
culture is understood and communicated. Try to imagine the
essence of a culture, without envisioning any of its
artifacts. I find I can't do it. The artifacts are
effectively synonymous with the culture.

# Verse as Artifact

Our quest is to create a culture of computing. We have seen
that to create a culture of any kind, it is necessary to
create an artifact that encodes that culture. Verse is that
artifact. After all, what better way to encode a culture of
computing, than in a computer program that creates more
computer programs?

Thus, Verse is both a culture, and the artifact that encodes
and transmits that culture. By learning to use Verse, you
will be imbued with its cultural values. If you reject the
values, you will of necessity reject Verse too.

Learning a culture is a perilous thing. If you acquire the
values of a culture that isn't shared by the people around
you, it can feel very isolating. On the other hand,
participating in a culture that *is* shared is one of the
great joys of being human. I recommend that you find at
least one buddy to learn Verse with. Try pair programming
with them, if you can. It will make learning faster and a
lot more fun.

# About Values

Of course, before you start to learn Verse's culture, you
will probably want to know what the values of that culture
actually are. I will do my best to describe them in the next
several sections. However, before I start listing out values
I want to give some context for where those values come
from—and why I'm even talking about values in the first
place.

In _Extreme Programming Explained_, Kent Beck talks about
the values that guide his software development process.
Among them he includes concepts like Simplicity, Feedback,
and Courage. He then derives *principles* of action
supporting those values, which can be phrased as imperatives
like "Assume Simplicity" and "Do Quality Work". Going one
step further, he presents a list of concrete
*practices*—day-to-day activities teams can do to align
their work with the principles. The practices support the
principles which support the values. In other words, there
is a hierarchy, and the values are on top, driving the whole
thing.

Verse embodies some of the same values as Extreme
Programming, but unlike Kent I don't see values as the root
of the hierarchy. I think there's a level above values,
inhabited by a single "meta-value" that I'll call the
_Guiding Quality_.

Many companies that make software (or anything, really) have
explicit values. I haven't found one that has an explicit
Guiding Quality. I think there are many reasons for this.
One reason is that Guiding Qualities are very hard to
express except through metaphor and indirection. But the
bigger reason is that if the average company actually drew a
picture of what their Guiding Quality was and put it on a
poster, people would run away from it. Sometimes it takes
the form of a mindless, insatiable hunger; sometimes it is
the slow, inexorable confidence of a cancer cell;
sometimes it is pure hedonism; sometimes the infinite
noiseless working of a world-encircling machine.

But it is almost never human. And this inhumanity is the
central problem I am seeking to correct by making Verse. To
be sure, the problem extends far beyond the domain of
software. But software is what I know, and therefore what I
can change. And with software becoming more and more central
to modern life, a change in how we think about software
seems likely to ripple to other areas as well.

# The Character of Nature

Verse's Guiding Quality is something that I call *the
character of nature*. The phrase comes from Christopher
Alexander's book _The Timeless Way of Building_, but he
uses it only once, as a kind of throwaway metaphor. I like
the phrase and so I have adopted it.

It is difficult to explain what the character of nature is,
but I will do my best.

Imagine a place in nature that feels comfortable and
home-like to you. It is probably not amazingly beautiful—not
something tourists would come to see. It is simply its
ever-changing self, and you happen to like it. And it
accommodates you, because you spend time with it.

Perhaps this is a difficult thing to imagine if you don't
spend a lot of time in nature. Fair enough. For me, this
place is a forest of mixed conifers in the hills west of the
San Francisco Bay. Deep under the forest canopy, in the
scoop of a valley that opens to the east, there is a flat
place: the long-ago floodplain of a creek (though now,
because of drought, there is just a trickle of brook that
almost never floods). A deep soft duff of needles covers it,
so there is not a lot of undergrowth; just big trees mostly.
The needles make a cushion for when I want to sit on the
ground but I have also moved a section of fallen trunk to a
particular spot that's sunny on cold mornings but shaded
otherwise. I can sit there, out of the wind, my back to the
sun, and hear the brook running.

The ground remembers where I go; my feet pack the earth so
seeds don't root there, and little by little trails form. I
don't have to do anything to maintain the trails except
walk.

How much is such a place worth? The question makes no sense
to me. I don't want to own this place or rent it from anyone
or claim any exclusive right to any part of it. For all I
know, other people come to this spot too, though I've never
seen a trace of anyone.

There are things I would never pay for or claim as my own,
but that I would defend with my life. Strange that we can
sometimes forget such things exist.

At this point you're probably thinking I've gone off my
rocker. That this doesn't have anything to do with software,
and you don't see how it's remotely possible for "the
character of nature" to be one of the values of a culture of
computing. That is precisely my point. The dissociation of
software from the character of nature is the problem that
Verse seeks to address.

What is it about my woodland haven that makes it so
compelling to me? In other words, what defines the character
of nature?

One aspect that is not really essential to this character,
and yet cannot be discounted, is the effect of sheer
familiarity. It was not an accident that I thought of a
place in the forest when thinking about the character of
nature. Nor is there anything inherent to forests that makes
them a uniquely suitable example of this character. I chose
the place in the forest because I go to the forest often and
the patterns that occur there are familiar to me. Marshes
and caves and mountains and steppes can all be beautiful and
comfortable in their own way, but I am not as familiar with
them, so descriptions of them do not move me as much. If I'd
grown up in a different place, I would probably have a
different scene in mind when I thought of the "character of
nature".

Our conclusions from this must be twofold: First, it is
important to consider what people will find familiar when
creating a system that is supposed to have the character of
nature. Second, it is important that when we consider the
character of nature we separate the aspects that are
essential from the aspects that are salient only because of
what is familiar to us. It would be wrong, for instance, to
conclude from what I've written above that "trees" are an
essential component of the character of nature (and in any
case, it is difficult to put trees into a software system).
The components that actually are essential are more subtle.

Another aspect that runs close to familiarity is
*uniqueness*. A place that has the character of nature is
special because it is not exactly like any other place. In
fact, without uniqueness our concept of "place" could not
exist at all. When we say that a thing is "in the middle of
nowhere" we really mean it might be anywhere; it is in a
place that has (to our eyes) no distinguishing
characteristics.

Though uniqueness might seem opposed to familiarity, it is
not so. Indeed, it is only because of the differences unique
to particular things that we can become familiar with them
at all. When I say my friends are "familiar" to me, what I
mean is that I understand the ways in which they are
different from other people. I know their moods and habits.
I know how their voices change when something is troubling
them. I can recognize them half a mile off, just by the way
they walk. If all people were the same it would be
impossible to be familiar with anyone in this way. So rather
than being opposed, familiarity and uniqueness are actually
interdependent.

The character of nature also relies on a diversity of
*material properties*. A place that has this character is
made up of materials that have consistent and versatile
properties. Think of the pine needles, the soil, and the old
tree trunk. Each has its role in the forest's ecology, and
each is also useful to me. I sit on the needles because of
their softness and the log because of its hardness. The
varying compactness of the soil helps form the trail in the
places where I walk. Though my uses of these things differ
from the forest's uses, they rely on the same material
properties: the flexibility and slow decomposition of the
needles and the air gaps between them; the firmness and
weight of the log; the sponginess of the soil.

Nature is always reusing and repurposing parts of
itself—that's how evolution works. But the parts can only be
reused because they have properties that make them good for
more than one purpose. The more possible reuses a thing has,
the more it approaches the character of nature.

Reuse can happen when the *properties* of a thing, rather
than what it *is*, become salient. And a thing develops the
character of nature when its properties and uses balance in
a kind of symbiosis.

For example, I have on my table a book and a deck of playing
cards. I have used one of the cards as a bookmark. It works
for this purpose because it is small enough that I can
easily place it in the book and big enough that it helps me
find my place again. It is flexible enough to bend with the
pages where they meet the spine, and stiff enough to help me
open the book at the right page. The fact that it is
actually the five of diamonds does not concern me. I care
primarily about its properties, not its identity.

You may find it unsettling that someone might reuse
components of a software system as haphazardly as I have
reused the five of diamonds. But the kind of reuse I
advocate is not haphazard at all. When the properties of the
objects in a system are exactly right, the ability to
repurpose those objects leads to a particular kind of
exactness that can only happen when one does exactly what
works in the moment. The five of diamonds is actually not a
great example of this kind of reuse because by using it as a
bookmark I've removed it from the deck, insidiously
undermining the cards' utility for actual gameplay. Verse
discourages mutation of object values, making such
skulduggery impossible. It's as if you could use the five of
diamonds as a bookmark while also keeping it in the deck—a
neat little magic trick, if I do say so myself.

The explanation above leaves one thing unclear, though,
which is: how did I think to use a playing card as a
bookmark in the first place? I can't recall ever having done
so in the past; I think I only did it today because the book
and the deck of cards happened to be juxtaposed on my table.
I didn't think about the card's properties or
consciously assess its suitability as a bookmark before I
picked it up. I just *did* it. How did I know it would work?

The key fact that made my reuse of the card successful is
that its relevant properties—thinness, stiffness, size,
pliability—form a cluster that I have encountered over and
over again in my life and with which I am intimately
familiar. That cluster has a name: paper.

# Paper

A *material* is a cluster of properties that repeats in the
world again and again.

Other artifacts

Verse values speed, but not for the same reason as the startup team I described earlier. The startup goes fast because their resources are scarce. Verse goes fast to create abundance. When you get results quickly, you can be curious and take more risks. You can play with different options. You can make daring choices knowing you can undo them relatively quickly if you need to.
